Hello, hello hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English.
The show where you can listen to
fascinating stories, and learn weird
and wonderful things about the world at
the same time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today
it is part two of our three-part
mini-series on European dictators.
In part one, we looked at the life
of The Grey Blur, Joseph Stalin.
In today’s episode, we are going to go to
the other side of the political spectrum,
to the far-right, and look at the life of
Benito Mussolini, the father of fascism.
And in part three, well you can
probably guess who it’s going to be, the
leader of Nazi Germany, Adolf Hitler.
Now, clearly it would be incredibly
difficult to give a thorough,
blow-by-blow account of Mussolini’s
entire life, and it certainly
won’t be possible in this episode.
So today, I’ll give a broad overview
of his life and place in Italian and
European history, whilst also trying
to give you a sense of the type of
man Mussolini was, and how his early
years shaped the dictator he became.
So, let’s get into it and talk about
Benito Mussolini, the father of fascism.
In the early hours of the 29th of
April, 1945, a crowd was gathering
in the Piazzale Loreto in Milan.
There was a sea of top hats,
military helmets, men in long
coats, and military vehicles.
In the middle of the square, a furious mob
gathered around something on the floor.
They screamed, cheered, and jeered.
Two dead bodies lay on the floor.
The crowd pushed forward, trying
to get closer, hoping to catch a
glimpse of one body in particular.
Jostling for position, the people who
had managed to push past the soldiers
were confronted by the face of Italy’s
fascist leader, Benito Mussolini.
People spat on him, trying to kick
his body, hurling abuse at the corpse.
Firemen arrived and dispersed
the crowd with jets of water.
People began to move back,
and order was restored.
But then the crowd pushed forward
again, took Mussolini’s body,
dragged him across the square, and
hung him up from a petrol station.
The mutilated body of the man
who had ruled Italy with an iron
first was there for all to see.
Il Duce was dead.
It was an end so brutal, so undignified,
that historians believe it was one of the
reasons Hitler decided to commit suicide,
rather than risk falling into the hands of
his enemies and enduring a similar fate.
It was an unlikely fate for many reasons,
and completely likely for many others.
This man, Benito Amilcare Andrea
Mussolini was born on the 29th of July,
1883, in Predappio, in central Italy.
His father, Alessandro, was a blacksmith
and committed socialist, and his
mother, Rosa, a devout Catholic.
In fact, Mussolini’s father wasn’t just
a fly-by-night socialist, but left-wing
enough to name his son after Benito
Juárez, Mexico’s liberal President
and the first indigenous head of state
anywhere in post-colonial Latin America.
His middle names, Andrea and
Amilcare, were given to him after
Andrea Costa and Amilcare Cipriani,
two famous Italian socialists.
As you’ll know, he would go
in an altogether different
direction to his namesakes.
In school, he was known as a shy and good
student but one with a violent temper.
At 10 years old he stabbed another
student, and then, at 14, in 1897, he
again stabbed a classmate with a pen
knife and was suspended from school.
After leaving school Mussolini worked
briefly as a school teacher but didn’t
enjoy the job, and in 1902 his prospects
were so poor that he moved to Switzerland.
He would spend the following two years
travelling around Switzerland and,
following his father’s lead, became
involved in socialist politics, often
clashing with police in the process.
A couple of years later, in 1904,
Mussolini returned to Italy and
continued to do bits of teaching,
remaining active in socialist politics,
before moving to Austria-Hungary
where he edited a socialist newspaper
but was deported back to Italy for
violating freedom of press laws.
As we’ll see from his own behaviour
later on, this is somewhat ironic.
Historians believe that Mussolini saw
himself as a bit of an intellectual.
He read philosophy, learned French and
German, and clearly thought himself
to be something of a grand thinker.
These grand thoughts would end up
leading him to the complete opposite
side of the political spectrum.
But let’s not get ahead of ourselves.
At this time, Mussolini was
still a committed socialist and
a committed anti-imperialist.
In 1911 he spent six months in prison
for inciting, or encouraging violence
at a rally against Italy’s war in Libya.
But even then Mussolini had visions
of grandeur, of big plans for himself,
and used his time in prison to begin
writing his autobiography, which
reportedly included descriptions of
his many romantic, sexual, conquests.
Even back then Mussolini was keen
to boast about his womanising, and
much like a more recent Italian Prime
Minister, Silvio Berlusconi, he was keen
to use it as part of his macho image.
Clearly, there was truth behind it, with
one biographer estimating that he slept
with around 5,000 women during his life.
If you’re wondering how you make time
for this while running a country, well
according to one account, he slept with
at least one woman every day at his
office while he was running the country.
Perhaps he would have ruled for a bit
longer if he had swapped this daily office
activity for something else, who knows.
Anyway, when he was finally released
from prison, Mussolini continued
working on several socialist newspapers,
but he supported Italy’s involvement
in the First World War, a position
that put him at odds, or in contrast
to, mainstream Italian socialists.
This view of war, and general enthusiasm
for violence and militarism, would lead
to his departure from the Socialist Party
in 1914, and his swing to the right.
With civil unrest spreading across
the country, Mussolini’s view of the
world began to change, moving away
from his socialist emphasis on social
class to believing that national
identity was more significant.
He was drafted into the Italian army in
September of 1915 where he fought on the
front lines and was promoted to the rank
of corporal before being discharged,
or released, after being wounded.
Upon his return to civilian life,
Mussolini the corporal became Mussolini
the journalist again, and by 1917
he was agitating for Italy to remain
in the war and support the allies.
It would be the start of his route to
power, but you might be surprised to hear
that he owes much of it - arguably all of
it - to the British intelligence services.
Yes, that’s right - archived records
have revealed that Mussolini was paid
by Britain’s famous MI5, the British
Intelligence Services, to write propaganda
articles encouraging support for Italy’s
continued participation in World War I.
He was paid £100 per week by MI5 - which
is around €10,000 a week in today’s
money, which also went towards paying
supporters to go and beat up and
intimidate anti-war protestors in Milan.
And Mussolini’s political views
had done an about turn, they
were completely different.
By the following year, in 1918, he was
publicly stating that a dictator could,
and should, take control of Italy.
He began to organise the different
fascist groups around Italy into a
national organisation known as the
Fasci Italiani di Combattimento,
which you could translate as something
like the Italian Fighting Groups.
The group appealed particularly to
war veterans and the unemployed, and
encouraged violence, mainly against
socialists, and Mussolini became
the de facto leader of the Fascists.
In late 1919, he ran as the Fascist
candidate in the Italian general election
but lost in a large Socialist victory.
In the aftermath of the election,
he was arrested for collecting
weapons and planning to overthrow
the government, but was released.
Then, in 1921, with the country
gripped by political instability and
fascists fighting communists in the
streets, The King, Victor Emmanuel
III dissolved the Italian Parliament.
The following election saw
big wins for the Fascists, and
Mussolini won a seat in Parliament.
Fascism was entering the
political mainstream.
Encouraged by their electoral
success, the party changed its
name to the Partito Nazionale
Fascista - the National Fascist Party.
In 1922 Mussolini’s men, the same
ones that had been paid with British
money to violently disrupt anti-war
rallies, changed to their famous black
shirt uniforms and were put in squads
that resembled Roman army groups.
In fact, Mussolini’s vision of
fascist Italy relied heavily on
romanticised notions of the Roman
Empire and what he saw to be Italy’s
rightful place among world powers.
In Parliament, he continued his calls
for a strong leader, and became known
as a charismatic and powerful public
speaker, delighting huge crowds with
dramatic gestures and facial expressions.
Giving a speech in Naples in October
of 1922, Mussolini promised the 40,000
fascists in the crowd that, “Either
the government will be given to us, or
we will seize it by marching on Rome.”
As the country deteriorated
into further civil and political
unrest, several Italian cities
were seized by Fascist squads.
And then, on the night of the 27th
of October, 1922, 30,000 Fascist
blackshirts gathered to demand the
resignation of Prime Minister Luigi Facta.
King Victor Emmanuel, Vittorio
Emmanuele, could only watch as
thousands of armed Fascists entered
Rome, though Mussolini wasn’t one of
them himself - he didn’t actually go.
The King quickly dissolved the government
and asked Mussolini to form a new one.
And just like that, Mussolini
became not only Prime Minister,
but the Minister of the Interior
and Minister for Foreign Affairs.
The journalist, the school teacher
and former-socialist, had become
the most powerful man in Italy.
But he wasn’t a fully-fledged,
a real, dictator just yet.
Over the next couple of years, Mussolini
built up more and more power, sidelining
democratic institutions and rivals
until he could destroy them altogether.
During this period there were several
unsuccessful assassination plots
against him, and in response he had all
Communist members of Parliament arrested.
Even those who couldn’t be
found guilty of any crimes were
detained for up to five years.
After dealing with the Italian left - his
former comrades, it must be remembered
- Mussolini turned his attention to
his other former passion: the press.
And let’s not forget, he was a former
journalist, so he was acutely aware of the
power of the written word, of the press.
As Mussolini began to tighten his grip
on the country, the freedoms of the press
were muzzled, or silenced, and cinemas
were made to show government propaganda.
Fascists owned the majority of
newspapers and controlled how things
were reported in the media, issuing
editorial guidelines and arresting
editors who didn’t follow them.
Being aware of the power of an image,
he was also very conscious about
how he was portrayed in the press.
And, as you may know, he was not a
tall man, he was 1.69 m, and he would
insist on photographs of him being
taken from above, or standing on
a box, or on a horse - anything to
make him seem more heroic and grand.
Now, historians generally say that
Mussolini confirmed his total control
of Italy, and grip on the country’s
institutions, a few years later, on the
3rd of January, 1925, when he made a
speech to the Italian parliament declaring
his right to supreme power of the country.
In just a few years, Mussolini had
assumed full control of Italy and become
the world’s first fascist dictator.
But what would he do next?
In the late 1920s and early
1930s, Mussolini further developed
his personality cult, giving
seemingly endless public speeches.
Carefully creating a hyper-masculine
image, Mussolini tried to establish
himself as an ‘Ubermensch’ - a
philosophical concept of a person
who is almost superhuman and has
powers ordinary people don’t have.
This concept was actually created by
Friedrich Nietzsche, a philosopher
historians believe Mussolini was fond of,
and one used by other fascist dictators
as a means of justifying their brutality.
In fact, it is thought that Hitler
himself gave Mussolini the complete
works of Nietzsche for his 60th birthday.
Now, on the subject of Hitler, it is
worth considering the relationship
between the two of them for a moment.
It is well-known that Hitler was a great
admirer of Mussolini in the early days,
and that Italian fascism was seen as
the ideological ‘big brother’ of Nazism.
Hitler particularly admired
Mussolini’s March on Rome - in fact
his failed putsch in Munich in 1923
was Hitler’s attempt to do the same.
In their early meetings,
however, Mussolini wasn’t
particularly impressed by Hitler.
After their first meeting in Venice
in 1934 - during which he refused a
translator and struggled with Hitler’s
thick Bavarian accent - Mussolini
reportedly described the German
dictator as a ‘mad little clown.’
Over time, however, and as Hitler
grew in power, their partnership
developed and Mussolini embraced
some of Hitler’s foreign policy
ideas and his anti-semitism.
Yet, despite what the propaganda at
the time showed, the relationship
between the two was a ‘marriage of
convenience’, or in other words,
a relationship for mutual gain, an
agreement that helps both parties.
The biggest implication of
their relationship, of course,
would come a few years later.
But Mussolini wasn’t just the
ideological father of fascism for
Hitler; he was the father of fascism
full-stop, and an example for every
European fascist that would follow.
And Mussolini knew it.
With the fascist general Franco plunging
Spain into Civil War, and fascism also on
the rise in Germany, Mussolini began to
look beyond his own borders and consider
the bigger picture, and his place in it.
In October of 1935, Mussolini ignored
the League of Nations and ordered Italian
troops to invade Ethiopia - then known
as Abyssinia – forcing the country's
Emperor, Haile Selassie, into hiding.
Mussolini, the man who just years
ago was an active anti-imperial
campaigner, declared Abyssinia, along
with the territories of Somaliland and
Eritrea, part of a new Italian Empire.
During the conflict Mussolini proved
himself to be particularly ruthless,
ordering the Italian forces to use
chemical weapons, including mustard
gas, as they slaughtered 50,000 people.
It would prove to be his only real
military success, and was against an
enemy with significantly inferior,
worse, weapons than the Italians.
Now, back in Europe, as the Spanish
Civil War intensified, Mussolini sent
tens of thousands of men to support
the fascists, which further alienated
Italy from other European powers.
Mussolini instead grew closer to another
European dictator: his old friend,
the ‘mad little clown’ Adolf Hitler,
who was no longer the fascist little
brother, but a valuable European partner.
When Italy invaded Abyssinia, Germany
had, after all, been the second country
to recognise Italy’s claim to it.
Both Hitler and Mussolini sided with
Franco in the Spanish Civil War,
and in 1937 Italy left the League of
Nations in solidarity with Germany.
In March of 1938, with Mussolini’s
support, Hitler invaded Austria.
And despite having had an on-off affair
with a Jewish author and academic for
many years, and Italian fascism not
initially being anti-semitic, Mussolini's
increasing closeness to Hitler and Nazism
increased his own anti-semitic views.
In 1938, Mussolini wrote an article
supportive of the German concept of the
Aryan race, and soon after, he called
for the expulsion of Jews from Italy.
In 1939, when Hitler invaded
Poland, Britain and France declared
war against Germany but Mussolini
remained neutral, for now.
When Germany took Denmark and Norway,
however, Mussolini became convinced
that Hitler would win the war, and after
the Nazis steamrollered through Holland
and Belgium, Italy and Germany signed
the “Pact of Steel” officially creating
the Axis powers, on May 22, 1939.
Now, to skip forward a few years, by 1943
it was clear that Italy was losing the
war, and that the Italian army wasn’t
particularly well organised or effective.
And as Italians realised this, Mussolini’s
grip on power began to wane, or decrease.
Even his propaganda machine began to fall
apart, and Italians increasingly listened
to and read foreign media to find out
what was really going on in the war.
On July 25th, of 1943, Mussolini was
voted out of power by his own Grand
Council, arrested, and thrown into prison.
When the new Italian Prime Minister
began secret peace talks with the Allies,
Hitler sent German troops into Italy.
Then, in September of 1943, allied
forces landed in Italy with the
aim of liberating the peninsula.
Fearful of being found by the advancing
allied troops, on the 12th of September
of 1943 Mussolini was rescued by an
elite unit of German SS paratroopers and
taken to German-occupied northern Italy.
There he was made Hitler’s puppet
leader, creating the Italian Social
Republic - known as the Salò Republic.
Though he claimed to be in full control
during the next year and a half, Mussolini
was effectively put under house arrest and
guarded by SS troops - in his own country.
How the tables had turned - how
the situation had reversed - since
Hitler and Mussolini’s first meeting.
And by June of 1945, allied forces
were rolling through Italy, and
Mussolini tried to escape to Spain
with his lover, Claretta Petacci.
And, this all takes us back to
the beginning of the episode,
Mussolini’s gruesome end.
Though he was strung up in the
Piazzale Loreto in Milan, he
didn’t actually die there, he was
already a dead man when he arrived.
On the 27th of April, 1945, a couple
of days before, a group of communist
partisans had stopped a convoy near
the village of Dongo on Lake Como.
Mussolini was found hiding in the
back of a truck, trying to disguise
himself in a German army overcoat and
helmet, but his distinctive shaved
head and jawline gave him away.
Autopsy reports suggest he was shot dead
the following day, on April 28th, 1945.
His body was then driven to
Milan and displayed for all
Italians - indeed the world - to see
Now, we need to jump forward almost 80
years to the modern day - to 2022, as
debatably more so than Stalin and Hitler,
the spectre of Benito Mussolini looms more
closely over his country than either of
the other subjects of this mini-series.
In October 2022, as you may know,
a lady called Giorgia Meloni became
Italy’s first female Prime Minister.
Her party, the Brothers of Italy,
is generally described as a
far-right or post-fascist party,
and Meloni has publicly expressed
her admiration of Mussolini.
As a teenager, Italy’s current Prime
Minister said, and I quote, “Mussolini
was a good politician, in that
everything he did, he did for Italy.”
Her party won 26% of the vote, so one
in four Italian voters decided that
she, a woman who had openly expressed
her administration for Mussolini,
she was the best choice for leader.
Now, this is not to say that this means
a quarter of Italy is fascist, of course,
but rather to point out that the legacy of
Benito Mussolini is still alive and well.
Yet, as we have discussed
today, Mussolini’s legacy went
beyond the borders of Italy.
He was, put simply, the
original fascist dictator.
It was his violence, his personality
cult, his charismatic public speaking,
his strongman one-party state and his
march on Rome that really gave birth to
fascism and inspired similar movements
across Europe in the inter-war years.
Though he’s not the the most infamous
of the fascists, Mussolini was a brutal
dictator who ordered the death of his
political opponents and imprisoned and
tortured anyone who dared to oppose him.
By some calculations, he was
indirectly responsible for
the deaths of 300,000 people.
His greatest, most dangerous, legacy,
however, is the fact that he started
the fascist movement, inspired its
rise, and created the political
divisions that - in Italy and around
the world - remain to this day.
When put like this, perhaps he
holds responsibility for the
deaths of tens of millions more.
Ok then, that’s it for today’s episode
on Benito Mussolini, the Italian dictator
who started fascism and met a gruesome
end at the hands of his own people.
I hope it was an interesting one,
and whether you knew a lot about
Mussolini, or this was the first time
you’d heard anything about him, well
I hope you learned something new.
As always, I would love to know
what you thought about this episode.
We have lots and lots of members
from Italy, so my question to you
is this: what is the legacy of
Benito Mussolini on modern Italy?
Do you think that Italy ever
really had to deal with its
role in the Second World War?
Are there any saving graces, any
positive things to be taken, from
the rule of Benito Mussolini?
I would love to know, so let’s
get this discussion started.
You can head right into our
community forum, which is at
community.leonardoenglish.com and get
chatting away to other curious minds.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds, by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.